Gaza may be facing a collapse of its
humanitarian system as donor countries
pull funding from the United Nations
relief and works agency or unua a
crucial provider of Aid both before and
after October 7th thus far at least
26,000 Gins have been killed and another
1.7 million have been displaced so why
during a time of Crisis have countries
pulled the funding and what will happen
to civilians who depend on the agency
for rival here to speak with us about
this is the United Nations special repor
on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territory occupied since
1967 Franchesca Alban Franchesca thanks
so much for joining me on upfront uh
Israel has accused 12 unua employees of
being involved in the October 7th
attacks against Israel uh the UN has
said that it's investigating these
serious allegations but since then at
least a dozen countries including the
United States Germany Germany the UK
have already stopped giving funding to
the agency uh un officials have warned
that the loss of the funding could lead
to a collapse of the humanitarian system
from your perspective what impact would
this have on the people um thank you for
having me Mark um first of all I think
that we should unpack this uh suspension
of of funds and to my knowledge the
number of countries who have done so has
reached 18 right now and this is
absolutely shocking and it's not
justifiable apparently I mean we have
not seen the the evidence that there are
allegations that um 12 staff members of
anra have participated in the seventh of
October attacks um ana without even
ensuring due process has terminated the
contracts of these uh of these people in
the interest of the agency as the
commissioner General said again the the
the logic of suspending funds given the
fact that the United Nations Andra has
already taken measures taken very
seriously these
allegations makes no sense whatsoever
and also because it's going to lead uh
to a humanitarian catastrophe worse than
what we are seeing already with the risk
of famine looming on the Gaza stet and
with the risk of diseases which are
already spreading becoming even worse
and killing more people the humanitarian
Affairs and emergency relief coordinator
of the un uh Martin griffit has uh has
said withdrawing funds from manwa is
perilous and would result in the
collapse of the humanitarian system in
Gala with far-reaching humanitarian and
human rights consequences not only in
Gaza in the occupied Palestinian
territory but also across the region
because we shall not forget that ra
operates in in Jordan in Syria in
Lebanon and including in the in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem um so bottom
line is that Israel would have to take
immediate responsibility for the 2.3
million survivors in in Gaza and this is
not a reassuring Prospect given the
reported level of violence against
civilians but also in the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory so in
light of the picture you just painted
The Gross humanitarian consequences the
the the violence the displacement the
disease the the the potential famine if
all of that is going to happen as a
consequence of the alleged crimes of 12
people in
unua would that not amount to Collective
punishment it does this was my first
assessment when I when I heard this
because first of all as I as I said it
makes not no sense logically to punish
the agency for something that has been
allegedly done by a few members of the
organization you know anra has a very
thorough uh vetting process but it I
mean what is expected to do it doesn't
have policing tools and like no other
agencies has so it's it's very
unrealistic to expect that and could
check in an environment as stands as
that of the Gaza Strip which has been
under blockade for 16 years and which
has suffered five major wors before the
7th of October where there is a lot of
tension and where Hamas is the facto the
ruling
Authority it's it's illogical but also
actually could you say a little bit more
about that vetting process though
because there are people in the global
Community who have accepted the logic
and the narrative that under what
actually is very indiscriminate in the
Palestinians that they hire to work on
the ground uh for unre particularly in
the Gaza Strip uh and that it's just a
breeding ground for for these types of
things how would you respond to that
what is what is it like what is the
vetting process
like um no look I think that there has
been um okay these these allegations
against anwa are part of an an attack
against the agency that dates back the a
and it has intensified as of the 7th of
October there has been incre increasing
smearing of the agency uh associating it
to Hamas and including parliamentarians
in the in Israel saying that the only
way to ensure Victory would imply
destroying anra as I said in general un
humanitarian agencies cannot vet local
Personnel for militancy but Anda does
background checks uh when when it assume
when it um recruits its staff and it has
a 13,000 13,000 staff members in Gaza
serving 1.7 million uh Palestinians so
75% of the Palestinians in Gaza are
Andra beneficiaries of course Andra
cannot monitoring staff actions outside
the work at the same time um anra has a
strong scrutin
over the Personnel it hires and in fact
every six months the names of both staff
members and beneficiaries and vendors
are circulated to all um host States
including Israel and so if even Israel
didn't have
information concerning any possible
wrongdoings committed by anra staff
because had it had it it would have
passed to the agency how can anra be
blamed right now so it seemed to me an
orchestrated campaign against against
anra so the allegations against unro
were made public on the same day that
the icj ruled on provisional measures in
South Africa's genocide case against
Israel uh is that a
coincidence do you want me to be honest
or diplomatic honest I believe I'll take
the honest
yeah look I it it's of course it was
striking it was striking in that the day
after the um the icj ruling there was
this new circulating and all of a sudden
all of a sudden a number of member
states the US first and
foremost decided to suspend uh to
suspend the aid to the agency so it can
be read as a way to shift the attention
away from the icj genocide interim order
and again it could be also seen as part
of a long-standing effort of Israel to
annihilate the
agency and this is something that dates
back as I said to the post also
agreement this is not something new but
at the same time What shocks me is the
it's not necessarily the
maneuvering possible maneuvering from
Israel what I find shocking is the
response by member states because
cutting funds to anra at a moment that
is existential for millions of
Palestinians in Gaza who are enduring
catastrophic living help me help me
understand that those member states
because again if it were even just the
United States or if Israel just made the
call and no one responded to to to the
request to cut underwar funds it would
be less shocking but again we're talking
about more than a dozen countries
suspending the funding before the
investigation is completed how do they
how is that justified how do you make
sense of that it makes again it cannot
be justified it's so it's so immoral
irresponsible but also it might have
serious legal implications for this for
these states uh and again on the one
hand there is the fact that some of
Israel's actions have been already found
by the icj plausibly constituting
genocide uh this implies legal
responsibility for member states because
basically the icj has alerted
International community of the risk of
genocide in Gaza and it has ordered
immediate and effective action so they
have to take all actions in their power
to prevent Israel from continuing what
might constitute genocide and the second
is to um to
ensure that they do not Aid and abet
with with illegal acts and they might be
seen as complicit with acts of genocide
so instead of uring uring that
humanitarian Aid is delivered is is even
strengthened no what they do is they
take action castigating the agency that
provides critical support to millions of
Palestinians in this threat how do you
make sense of that I mean you you point
out the Paradox and this huge
contradiction how do these powerful
Nations arrive at the conclusion that
this makes sense I've seen a number of
countries um announcing that that they
will consider restating eight well it's
not sufficient they shouldn't have done
it in the first place now they should uh
release the funds as soon as possible um
I don't know what they are telling
themselves I have no idea but I hope
that civil society and the people of the
people of this country will will take
action themselves against the government
this is not the time to be silent again
um the international Community has
proven unable unable to prevent
genocides in in other occasions it has
happened in Rwanda it has happened in
Bosnia heroina but this is unique as the
state of of South Africa has has said
before the international court of
justice because this is a genocide that
is being televised and documented by the
very the very victims and the lack of
empathy the lack of empathy is toward
these people shown by primarily but not
only Western countries is abysmo and
this represents such a this is such a
watershed moment mark because it is um
it's clear that there is a huge divide
that is not so just symbolic between the
west and the rest where there is also a
gray area where in my view Arab
countries have not done enough either to
protect the Palestinians but again
International law is being completely
dismantled whatever the
International International law-based
System can do to protect uh the life of
of people in danger and to ensure peace
and stability for all is being
completely dismantled and this is
um this is shocking of course Franchesca
Alban thank you so much for joining us
in up
front thank you all right everyone that
is our show up front we'll be back next
week